History of JES2- by Jack Schudel

In the mid-1960's a small group of IBM employees working at the Manned
Spacecraft Center in Houston worked on a program called HASP (please
see next section for "How HASP got its name") which eventually was made
available as an FDP.  Its popularity and use expanded such that by
February 1971 IBM released HASP II Version 3.0 as a Type III product
with Class A support.  This HASP ran as an optional extension to
OS/MVT, performing the peripheral functions associated with job
processing.  In March of 1973 IBM released the SVS (i.e. OS/VS2 Release
1) operating system using a new version of HASP referred to as Version
4.0 HASP II Version 4.0 was not a System Control Program (SCP).  It was
still optionally available to replace OS/VS2 Release 1 readers and
writers and continued to be a Class A service.  With the availability
of OS/VS2 Release 2 (MVS), HASP's name was changed to JES2.

JES2 now runs as an operator started task in its own address space,
providing I/O spooling for local and remote unit record devices. Unlike
its predecessor, HASP, JES2 is an integral part of the SCP, and
receives the appropriate service support.  In 1978 IBM Further enhanced
the JES2 product with the announcement of Network Job Entry (NJE).

How HASP got its name

Although HASP, and its successor, JES2, are well known and widely used,
few people know the origins of the name.  If you were to ask the
hundreds of HASP fans, recognizable at SHARE by their many orange
talismans, most would not know.  A few would give the wrong, IBM
perpetuated answer.

For the truth we must go back to the mid 1960's.  IBM's OS/360 was in
trouble.  The spooling (wonder where that name came from) support was
slow and the overhead was high. Many programming groups independently
attacked the problem.  ASP, loosely based upon the tightly coupled IBM
7090/7094 DCS, held the lead in the OS/360 spooling sweepstakes. ASP's
need for at least two CPU's fit well with IBM Marketing's plans for the
System/360. Meanwhile, a group of IBM SE's, located in Houston,
developed a different product of which they were justifiably proud.
They wanted to popularize it, as they correctly suspected it would be
the balm for OS/360 users, increasing the usability and popularity of
the operating system, and, not incidentally, furthering their careers.
All they needed was the right name] A name which was easy to remember,
a name which would draw attention to their product, and a name to
distract from the ASP publicity.  That name was Half-ASP, or HASP.
Naturally, if HASP and ASP were products of two different companies,
the FTC would have stepped in to stop such a predatory product name.
Regulatory action was prevented, however, because IBM is "one big happy
family", believed by many to be larger than the Government.

The new HASP erased some of ASP's publicity lead and capitalized on the
rest.  Because the "H" sound is nearly silent in English, no discussion
of spooling systems for OS/360 could be carried on without mention of
both products.  HASP adherents quickly discovered that a picture of a
hasp could symbolize their product's security and confidence.  Further,
the ASP people were opposed to begin using a poisonous viper for their
logo.

Where, then, did the wrong answer come from?  IBM could not live with
Half-ASP, so their name calling department went to work and came up
with:  Houston Automatic Spooling Priority System (HASPS).  Close
enough for IBM work. Why Orange?

Many users of HASP and JES2 are well aware that the color ORANGE seems
to predominate our product, but few are aware of its origins.  Some
have proposed that it is a reference to the citrus fruit in order to
avoid the other citrus fruit connotation of LEMON. But this is NOT
true. Others have suggested the color was picked as a challenge for
those writing songs for the Sing-Along because there are only two known
words that rhyme with Orange.  (It is left as an exercise to the reader
to find them.)  But this also is not true.  What is even worse is that
some jealous ASP (or JES3) users have joked that Orange is one half of
a halloween prank.  Of course that is definitely not the reason for our
use of the color Orange.

The truth of the matter is that HASP was written by Tom Simpson in 1964
while he was working for IBM at the Manned Space Craft Center in
Houston.  Bob Crabtree and Dick Hitt were also involved in the original
package that was released as the FDP.  When Tom came to his first SHARE
meeting he always carried and signed things with an Orange pen.  The
reason he did this had nothing to do with HASP at that time, it was
because is alma mater's colors (University of Texas) were Orange and
White.  Since Tom was "Mr. HASP", it did not take long for people to
start associating Orange with HASP.
